reporting from occupied East Jerusalem
it is 20 minutes past 400 p.m. which was
the time when as of now we expect we
could at any point see movement on the
release of captives from Gaza and the
release of Palestinian prisoners uh from
uh inside Israeli jails now Thailand's
prime minister you heard Rory talking
about Thai Nationals that are that have
been held in Gaza Thailand's prime
minister has confirmed on social media
that 12 Thai workers who were taken
captive by Hamas
have been released this has happened on
the sidelines of the deal that's going
to see the release of Israeli captives
and Palestinian prisoners uh Palestinian
prisoners released Bangkok had been
holding separate talks to repatriate
about two dozen Tha Nationals taken
captive by Hamas from Southern Israel on
October the 7th let's bring in our
diplomatic editor James Bay James a lot
of moving parts right now um I'm just
finding out about the Tha Nationals
being released this is I I suppose this
is
consistent to to some extent with what
Hamas with what we've known about these
negotiations which are there are these
negotiations between Hamas the main ones
Hamas
Israel uh I beg your pardon mediated by
Qatar between Hamas and Israel but
they're also bilateral negotiations
apparently between Hamas and other
countries whose Nationals they're
holding yeah the cat forign Ministry
spokesman when he was giving the details
um about 24 hours ago of uh the main
deal said this is just a deal uh
involving Israeli captives and
potentially Israeli jeel Nationals on
one side and Palestinian prisoners on
the other but we know that there are
other Nationals involved and we know
that there were these 23 ties who were
taken um captive uh back on October the
7th now what were these T Tha Nationals
doing uh in southern Israel they were
agricultural workers uh and uh Thailand
had been very strongly making the case
that they are not part of the conflict
that is going on they just have happen
to be in the area they are not rich
people they were doing a pretty lowly
job there uh in southern Israel they're
not parties to this conflict and they
should be released and what is
interesting is Thailand's been trying to
get as much support as it can um for
their release and it's been speaking uh
to a country that it has reasonably good
relations with which is Iran and Iran
has been doing we believe mediation on
behalf of Thailand for these Nationals
also worth given that the the caty
channel is the is the main channel of of
communication to Hamas worth telling you
that the Iranian foreign minister was
here in Doha in the last few hours so I
think significant we're all waiting for
the Israeli captives that are part of
this formal deal um but that's going to
involve 12 people uh sorry 13 people we
think we've already got 12 people 12 Tha
Nationals uh released uh now confirmed
by the Thai um prime minister this is 12
out of 23 of course we don't know how
many of those 23 are still alive and
when whether any of the Thai Nationals
died uh in in the 47 days of Israeli
bombardment of Gaza one really simple
thing that lesson from from this latest
news that 12 Thai workers have actually
been released is that this is somehow
working there is a mechanism we've been
talking about the mechanics of the deal
we've been explaining to our viewers
that this is quite complicated uh that
there needs to be trust between these
two Ides Israel and Hamas clearly there
has Hamas has found a way to release
captives when it came to the Thai
Nationals absolutely and I it's not
clear to me yet whether the
international Committee of the Red Cross
were the facilitators for this but I
think that's probably likely and they
are the facilitator We Believe of the
first batch of Israeli captives the 13
that were expecting to be released
anytime soon and it's also worth telling
you here in this Newsroom there are
people pouring over all of the live
pictures coming from the from the scene
at the moment to see if we see anyone
crossing the border at Rafa well it
seems that 12 Tha Nationals have crossed
that border and no one saw them you know
you know I was going to
say it's unlikely that we're going to
see something on these live pictures but
actually I could be completely wrong we
don't know what to expect I mean maybe
maybe a group of captives shows up and
and they're caught on these life shots
we don't know which is why we're looking
at them every every second can you
explain to our viewers can you address
the notion of how
fragile this is the reason we're talking
so much about the mechanics of the deal
is because when the mediator has
presented how this was going to work he
was at pains to explain you know we're
we're watching this every second because
it could go wrong yeah well after the
events of October 7th and after
everything that's happened since in
terms of the intensity of the
bombardment there's absolutely no trust
between the two Central parties here and
so they've had to try and make a a a
plan um that would not build trust but
build momentum into the process and so
what you've had is the Ceasar temporary
Ceasar coming into effect and then this
staged process of um C captives um will
be released Israeli captives by Hamas
and then also as we're seeing now
Palestinian prisoners uh released by
Israel and if both sides have got
something from day one then we think
there'll be
set of lists prepared for day two with
another batch of um people that are hold
held by herass women and children held
by Hamas and then another batch of um
prisoners uh women and children that are
held by Israel in Israeli jails
Palestinians and then day two can go on
and it's going to be like this it's
going to be day by day they're obviously
very very concerned about some sort of
accidental violation of this that that
some way uh the the the the um the
ceasefire will be broken and I can tell
you there is a control room here in Doha
the kataris have set up realtime links
direct links with the Israeli side with
Mossad with lines to the Israeli
military and of course um Qatar has a
direct line to Hamas as well the idea
being if there's some sort of problem
some sort of minor violation that they
can transort it there and then and it
doesn't become something that brings
down the whole of this uh plan ceasefire
of 4 days and I think many are hoping
that this can extend beyond 4 days so
this is it you were talking about
momentum the point of momentum obviously
is to go beyond the four days explain
that because the qari mediators again
were saying this is this is Phase One
essentially these four days and for us
uncertain and usure unsure and fraught
with with risk and difficulty as they
are the mediators are hoping that this
can take us into day five six seven and
maybe Beyond well then you start to have
a problem because it's very hard to to
know how many days exactly and because
because we don't know um with regard to
Hamas and we don't think Hamas hold all
of the captives in Gaza how many of
these captives are alive so we don't
know how many women and children there
are in total alive because I have to say
once you go beyond the women and
children on both sides the stakes start
getting much much higher um both sides
will want more in return and remember
the stated position of the Israeli
government backed by the us as well
which is that Israel retains its right
of self-defense after October the 7th
and Israel is making it clear that it
hasn't finished with its aims of this
war and that they will be restarting
this war now could they be um persuaded
not to do that my own view is having
seen the intensity of the way they
prosecuted this War I think when they
say they mean to resume it they mean
that yeah so far they have fulfilled
their promises when it comes to
attacking Gaza and um and bringing
bringing unprecedented Firepower to Bear
uh in this war thank you very much James
Bay Al a senior diplomatic editor for
joining us